---
title: "交换代数 1.3"
date: 2022-08-05
comment: /blog/2022/08-05/
authors:
  - complex2liu
categories:
  - commutative algebra
draft: false
---

### 习题 3.1

考虑 $A$-模映射

$$
A \to A/I_1 \times \cdots \times A/I_n, \quad
a \mapsto (a + I_1, \cdots, a + I_n).
$$

因为 $I_1 \cap \cdots \cap I_n = (0)$,
所以这个映射是单射.
每一个 $A/I_i$ 都是 Noetherian ring,
通过满射 $A \to A/I_i$ 拉回得到 $A/I_i$ 的 $A$-模结构,
容易看出每个 $A/I_i$ 都是 Noetherian $A$-模.

### 习题 3.2

Denote by $D$ the fibre product $A \times_C B$.
Let $\alpha, \beta$ denote the map $D \to A, D \to B$ respectively.
Since $f, g$ are surjective, so are $\alpha, \beta$.
Note that $\ker(\alpha) \cap \ker(\beta) = (0) \in D$
and that $D/\ker(\alpha) \cong A, D/\ker(\beta) \cong B$.

### 习题 3.3

Assume $A$ is a local ring such that the maximal ideal
$\mathfrak{m} = (m)$ is principal.
Note that $\mathfrak{m}^n = (m^n)$.

{{< math-env type = "Claim" >}}
For any $a \in A$, the principal ideal $(a)$ is strictly larger than $(ma)$.
{{< /math-env >}}

{{< proof >}}
Suppose not, then $ma \mid a$.
There exists $k \in A$ such that $(1 - km)a = 0$.
Note that $1 - km$ is a unit since $1 + \mathfrak{m} \subseteq A^\times$.
{{< /proof >}}

{{< math-env type = "Claim" >}}
Assume $\bigcap_n \mathfrak{m}^n = (0)$. Then
for any $a \in A$, it can be uniquely represented as $um^n$
for some $n \in \mathbb{N}$ and $u \in A$ a unit.
{{< /math-env >}}

{{< proof >}}
因为 $\bigcap_n \mathfrak{m}^n = (0)$,
所以存在 $n \in \mathbb{N}$ 使得 $a \in \mathfrak{m}^n$,
但是 $a \notin \mathfrak{m}^{n+1}$.
Write $a = um^n$, then $u \notin \mathfrak{m}$, so $u$ is a unit.
{{< /proof >}}

Let $I$ be an ideal of $A$. 设 $n_0$ 是集合

$$
\\{n \in \mathbb{N}: \text{There exists $a \in I$ such that $a = um^n$}\\}
$$

的最小值, then $I = (m^{n_0})$.

假若 $\bigcap_n \mathfrak{m}^n \ne (0)$,
then take $a \in \bigcap_n \mathfrak{m}^n$ which is non-zero.
Constuct an increasing sequence of ideals

$$
(a_0) \subset (a_1) \subset (a_2) \subset \cdots
$$

where $a_0 = a$ and $ma_{n+1} = a_n$.
This implies that $A$ is not Noetherian.

### 习题 3.4

If $II^{-1} = A$, then there exists $x_i in I, y_i \in I^{-1}$
such that $\sum_{i=1}^n x_iy_i = 1$.
显然 $\sum_{i=1}^n Ax_i \subseteq I$.
另一方面, 对任意 $x \in I$, 我们有 $x = \sum_{i=1}^n x_i(y_ix)$.
注意 $y_ix \in I^{-1}I \subseteq A$,
故 $I \subseteq \sum_{i=1}^n Ax_i$.

### 习题 3.5

Suppose $J$ is an invertible fractional ideal,
then $J$ is finite generated, say by $\frac{a_1}{b_1},\cdots,\frac{a_n}{b_n}$.
现在环 $A$ 是 UFD, 我们可以不妨设 $\gcd(a_i, b_i) = 1$.

设 $u = \operatorname{lcm}(b_1,\cdots,b_n)$ and $v = \gcd(a_1,\cdots,a_n)$.
Let $D$ be the fractional ideal generated by single element $\frac{u}{v}$.
We claim that $D = J^{-1}$.

显然 $\frac{u}{v}\frac{a_i}{b_i} \in A$, 所以 $D \subseteq J^{-1}$.
另一方面, 设 $\frac{p}{q} \in J^{-1}$ with $\gcd(p,q) = 1$.
Then by definition $\frac{p}{q}\frac{a_i}{b_i} \in A$ for all $i$,
it follows that $q \mid a_i, b_i \mid p$ for all $i$.
Hence $q \mid v, u \mid p$. 设 $v = kq, p = tu$,
then $\frac{p}{q} = \frac{kp}{kq} = kt\frac{u}{v}$, 故 $J^{-1} \subseteq D$.

因为 $J^{-1} = (\frac{u}{v})$, 所以 $J = (\frac{v}{u})$.
也就是说, UFD 中的 invertible fractional ideal 都是 principal ideal.

### 习题 3.6

考虑 $I_n = \ker(\varphi^n)$, 则 $I_n$ 构成 $A$ 的一个理想升链, which must terminate.
Replacing $\varphi$ by $\varphi^N$ for succificenly large $N$
wee see that we can assume $\ker\varphi = \ker\varphi^2$,
which implies that $\ker\varphi \cap \operatorname{im}\varphi = \\{0\\}$.
Since $\varphi$ is surjective, $\ker\varphi = \\{0\\}$.

### 习题 3.7

如果 $A$ 是 Noetherian 环, 那么 finite module 和 finitely presented 是一回事.

假如 $A$ 不是 Noetherian 环, 那么存在某个理想 $I$ 不是有限生成.
Set $M = A/I$, then $M$ is generated by $1 + I$. 我们有 $A$-module 短正合列

$$
0 \to I \to A \to M \to 0.
$$

If $M$ is finitely presented, then $I$ is finite generated, contradiction.
